# ACI Specification Software Interface

This Specification Describes the interface that a software written to inteface with devices accessible to ACI.
This Specification is intended to be implemented by Host Devices that are

## No Requirement to Implement

A Hardware Vendor that implements the ACI Hardware Protocol Specification as a Host is not required to provide this interface to communicate with devices accessible via the ACI Bus.

Compliance with this specification is deemed separate from complaince with the ACI Hardware Protocol Specification.

## DMA Space 

The DMA Space refers to a region of memory reserved by the CPU, which is used to access ACI Devices directly.

The DMA Space is 0x20000000 (2^29) bytes large, but a CPU may specify a smaller power of 2 size if it supports fewer device id assignments.  If the CPU specifies a smaller size, it should provide a mechanism to query the size of this space. The implementation vendor should document this mechanism.

The DMA Space is aligned to its size.

Accesses to this DMA Space have a base address, which is aligned to at the alignment of the DMA Space. The default base address, and whether one is assigned by default, is unspecified. The CPU should provide a mechanism to query and modify the base address. The implementation vendor should document this mechanism.

When accessing memory in this region, the lower 29 (or fewer, as specified above) bits of the address are considered. 

The top 16 bits of the address form the device id, for which device to access. The next 12 bits form the DMA Address. The remaining 3 bits are reserved and should be zero, expect as documented below.

## DMA Accesses

An access made into the DMA space performs a DMA transfer - reads perform a DMA Read, and writes perform a DMA Write. The access must be 4 byte aligned and 4 bytes in size. Except as documented below, any other accesses to this space have an undefined result.

The Device ID and the DMA Address are computed as in [DMA Space](#dma-space). 

CPUs should detect repeated accesses of the same type to the same or to incrementing consecutive addresses and fold them into a single transfer operation if possible. The mechanism of communicating repeating or consecutive accesses to the CPU is CPU specific. 

## Root Bus Exposure

Hosts shall expose the root bus as a 1xN ACI Bridge (class 0x0004, subclass 0x0000). This device shall by default be exposed via devid 0, but Host Vendors may provide a mechanism to configure the device id assigned to the root bus.

Hosts may expose additional Bridge Devices connected to the that are built-in to the Host. Remaining devices connected to any physical ACI bus should be exposed as a device connected to either the root bus or one of these additional bridge devices. 

Additional built-in Bridge Devices may be assigned a device ID by the Host. These must be assigned sequentially, starting from 0x0001. It is Host-specific whether assignments are depth-first or breadth-first. 

Devices connected to any additional built-in Bridge Device may also be assigned a device ID by the Host. It is Host-specific whether assignments are depth-first or breadth-first, and whether or not built-in bridge devices are assigned before or at the same time as assigning connected devices.

Hosts must permit supervisors to assign device ids to devices connected to any host bus that was assigned a device id automatically. Hosts must not assume supervisors will maintain host-made device id assignments.

## Interrupts

The Host should expose a mechanism to translate signals raised on the Device to Host interrupt into Interrupt Requests handled by the CPU. The Mechanism for handling such Interrupt Requests is CPU-specific. The mechanism for assigning an IRQ or enabling this behaviour is also not specified.
In this case, information about which device raised the interrupt is not required to be made available, and supervisors must recursively enumerate bus devices to find which interrupt is signaled. 


The Host should expose a mechanism to translate raised signal for the Device to Host interrupt line of any device connected to the root bus, and may expose such a mechanism for any additional built-in Bridge Devices. Use of such a mechanism may be exclusive of enabling the behaviour for all Device to Host Interrupts passed through by the root bus. Otherwise, configuring both mechanisms shall cause the more specific mechanism to issue the IRQ when a device-to-host interrupt is raised that would activate multiple IRQs.

If the supervisor explicitly disables the host-to-device interrupt forwarding for a device in the root bus, or any built-in bridge devices, whether or not interrupts configured for that device will operate is unspecified. Likewise, if the supervisor explicitly enables the host-to-device interrupt forwarding for such a device, whether or not its interrupts continue to override more specific configuration is unspecified.
The value set for host-to-device interrupt forwarding is unspecified for any builtin bridge, and may be modified when interrupt translation is enabled at any level.


